docs: add floci integration documentation (#1373)
microsoft/aspire.dev: src/frontend/src/content/docs/integrations/compute/floci.mdx

---

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';
import { Aside, Badge, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import flociIcon from '@assets/icons/floci-icon-light.svg';

<Badge text="⭐ Community Toolkit" variant="tip" size="large" />

<div className={'float-inline-left icon'} 
     style={{
      backgroundColor: '#1f1e33',
      borderRadius: '8px',
      border: '1px solid #1f1e33', /* Optional: adds subtle visibility */
      padding: '16px'
    }}
>
  <Image
    src={flociIcon}
    alt="Floci logo"
    width={100}
    height={100}
    data-zoom-off
  />
</div>

The Aspire Floci hosting integration enables you to model [Floci](https://floci.io) — a family of high-performance local cloud emulators — as container resources in your Aspire application. Floci ships one image per cloud, each API-compatible with its respective provider:

- **`floci/floci`** — AWS, 65+ services including Lambda, S3, DynamoDB, SQS, and SNS
- **`floci/floci-az`** — Azure, including Blob/Queue/Table Storage, Cosmos DB, Functions, Event Hubs, and Service Bus
- **`floci/floci-gcp`** — GCP, including Pub/Sub, Firestore, Datastore, Storage, Secret Manager, and Cloud Functions

> Every API is available in both C# and TypeScript (polyglot AppHost). It supports:

Reviewer: I believe we're standardizing on "polyglot" meaning any language including C#. This suggestion clarifies that:
```suggestion
Every API is available in both C# and TypeScript AppHosts. The integration supports:
```

---
title: Floci integration

> seoTitle: Aspire Floci integration for AWS, Azure & GCP

Reviewer: Best to avoid the ampersand and use the Oxford comma;

```suggestion
seoTitle: Aspire Floci integration for AWS, Azure, and GCP
```

- **`floci/floci`** — AWS, 65+ services including Lambda, S3, DynamoDB, SQS, and SNS
- **`floci/floci-az`** — Azure, including Blob/Queue/Table Storage, Cosmos DB, Functions, Event Hubs, and Service Bus
- **`floci/floci-gcp`** — GCP, including Pub/Sub, Firestore, Datastore, Storage, Secret Manager, and Cloud Functions

Every API is available in both C# and TypeScript (polyglot AppHost). It supports:

- Running any combination of the AWS, Azure, and GCP emulators as container resources in the same Aspire application
- Automatic environment variable injection for dependent services to connect to the emulated cloud
- Customizable port and cloud-specific defaults (region, account ID, project ID)
- Data persistence with named volumes or bind mounts
- Docker-socket access for container-backed services (Lambda, Azure Functions, Cloud Run/Cloud SQL)
- An optional [Floci UI](https://github.com/floci-io/floci-ui) web console, attachable to one or all three clouds at once

> - Custom Quarkus configuration files for the AWS emulator

Reviewer: As these bullet points all form complete sentences with the introductory fragment, they should have periods:

```suggestion
- Running any combination of the AWS, Azure, and GCP emulators as container resources in the same Aspire application.
- Automatic environment variable injection for dependent services to connect to the emulated cloud.
- Customizable port and cloud-specific defaults (region, account ID, project ID).
- Data persistence with named volumes or bind mounts.
- Docker-socket access for container-backed services (Lambda, Azure Functions, Cloud Run/Cloud SQL).
- An optional [Floci UI](https://github.com/floci-io/floci-ui) web console, attachable to one or all three clouds at once.
- Custom Quarkus configuration files for the AWS emulator.
```

To start building an Aspire app that uses Floci, install the [📦 CommunityToolkit.Aspire.Hosting.Floci](https://www.nuget.org/packages/CommunityToolkit.Aspire.Hosting.Floci) NuGet package:

<Tabs syncKey="aspire-lang">
<TabItem id="csharp" label="C#">

```bash title="Terminal"
aspire add communitytoolkit-floci
```

Or, choose a manual installation approach:

```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
#:package CommunityToolkit.Aspire.Hosting.Floci@*
```

```xml title="AppHost.csproj"
<PackageReference Include="CommunityToolkit.Aspire.Hosting.Floci" Version="*" />
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem id="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```bash title="Terminal"
aspire add communitytoolkit-floci
```

This updates your `aspire.config.json` with the Floci hosting integration package:

```json title="aspire.config.json" ins={3}
{
  "packages": {
    "CommunityToolkit.Aspire.Hosting.Floci": "*"
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Add a Floci resource

Each cloud has its own dedicated method — `AddFlociAws`/`addFlociAws`, `AddFlociAzure`/`addFlociAzure`, and `AddFlociGcp`/`addFlociGcp` — and each returns its own resource type. Add whichever clouds your app depends on; they can coexist in the same AppHost.

> **AWS**

Reviewer: Should be a sub heading rather than bold:

```suggestion
#### Add a Floci resource for AWS
```

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var aws = builder.AddFlociAws("floci-aws");

var api = builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api")
    .WithReference(aws)
    .WaitFor(aws);

builder.Build().Run();
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
import { createBuilder } from './.aspire/modules/aspire.mjs';

const builder = await createBuilder();

const aws = await builder.addFlociAws('floci-aws');

const api = await builder.addProject('api', '../Api/Api.csproj')
    .withReference(aws)
    .waitFor(aws);

await builder.build().run();
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

`WithReference(aws)`/`withReference(aws)` uses the standard Aspire connection string injection and automatically injects the AWS environment variables listed in [Environment variables](#environment-variables) into the dependent resource.

> **Azure**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Add a Floci resource for Azure
```

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var azure = builder.AddFlociAzure("floci-az");

builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api")
    .WithReference(azure)
    .WaitFor(azure);
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const azure = await builder.addFlociAzure('floci-az');

await builder.addProject('api', '../Api/Api.csproj')
    .withReference(azure)
    .waitFor(azure);
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> **GCP**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Add a Floci resource for GCP
```

<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var gcp = builder.AddFlociGcp("floci-gcp", defaultProjectId: "my-project");

builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api")
    .WithReference(gcp)
    .WaitFor(gcp);
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const gcp = await builder.addFlociGcp('floci-gcp', {
    defaultProjectId: 'my-project',
});

await builder.addProject('api', '../Api/Api.csproj')
    .withReference(gcp)
    .waitFor(gcp);
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Configure resource properties

**AWS** accepts a custom region and account ID:

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var aws = builder.AddFlociAws("floci-aws",
    defaultRegion: "eu-west-1",
    defaultAccountId: "123456789012");
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const aws = await builder.addFlociAws('floci-aws', {
    defaultRegion: 'eu-west-1',
    defaultAccountId: '123456789012',
});
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

- **Port**: The host port Floci listens on (default: 4566)
- **Default Region**: AWS region for the emulator (default: `us-east-1`)

> - **Default Account ID**: AWS account ID for the emulator (default: `000000000000`)

Reviewer: This might flow better if you describe all the parameters first and then give examples:
```suggestion
**AWS** accepts the following customizable properties:

- **Port**: The host port Floci listens on (default: 4566)
- **Default Region**: AWS region for the emulator (default: `us-east-1`)
- **Default Account ID**: AWS account ID for the emulator (default: `000000000000`)

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var aws = builder.AddFlociAws("floci-aws",
    defaultRegion: "eu-west-1",
    defaultAccountId: "123456789012");
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const aws = await builder.addFlociAws('floci-aws', {
    defaultRegion: 'eu-west-1',
    defaultAccountId: '123456789012',
});
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

```

**GCP** accepts a custom project ID:

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var gcp = builder.AddFlociGcp("floci-gcp",
    defaultProjectId: "my-project");
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const gcp = await builder.addFlociGcp('floci-gcp', {
    defaultProjectId: 'my-project',
});
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

- **Port**: The host port Floci listens on (default: 4566)

> - **Default Project ID**: GCP project ID for the emulator (default: `floci-local`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**GCP** accepts the following customizable properties:

- **Port**: The host port Floci listens on (default: 4566)
- **Default Project ID**: GCP project ID for the emulator (default: `floci-local`)

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var gcp = builder.AddFlociGcp("floci-gcp",
    defaultProjectId: "my-project");
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const gcp = await builder.addFlociGcp('floci-gcp', {
    defaultProjectId: 'my-project',
});
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

```

```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var aws = builder.AddFlociAws("floci-aws")
    .WithDockerSocket();

var azure = builder.AddFlociAzure("floci-az")
    .WithDockerSocket();

var gcp = builder.AddFlociGcp("floci-gcp")
    .WithDockerSocket();
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const aws = await builder.addFlociAws('floci-aws');
await aws.withDockerSocket();

const azure = await builder.addFlociAzure('floci-az');
await azure.withDockerSocket();

const gcp = await builder.addFlociGcp('floci-gcp');
await gcp.withDockerSocket();
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

On non-standard Docker installations (e.g., Podman, Rancher Desktop), pass the socket path explicitly:

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var aws = builder.AddFlociAws("floci-aws")
    .WithDockerSocket("/run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock");
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const aws = await builder.addFlociAws('floci-aws');
await aws.withDockerSocket({ socketPath: '/run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock' });
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Add data persistence to Floci

> By default each emulator stores all state in memory. Both persistence approaches are available on all three clouds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default each emulator stores all state in memory. This information is lost when you restart the application. If you want state to persist across app restarts you can use either a data volume or a data bind mount. They are available on all three clouds.

<Aside type="note">
For more information on data volumes and details on why they’re preferred over bind mounts, see [Docker docs: Volumes](https://docs.docker.com/engine/storage/volumes).
</Aside>
```

> #### Named volume (recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Data volume (recommended)
```

> Named volumes automatically switch Floci from in-memory to persistent mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data volumes automatically switch Floci from in-memory to persistent mode:
```

</Tabs>

Example `floci.yml` that enables debug logging and disables signature validation:

```yaml title="floci.yml"
floci:
  auth:
    validate-signatures: false
quarkus:
  log:
    level: DEBUG
```

All Floci settings can also be set via `FLOCI_`-prefixed environment variables — `WithConfigFile`/`withConfigFile` is only needed for settings that don't have a dedicated extension method.

### Connection string / endpoint properties

Available on all three cloud resource types:

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>
```csharp
var endpoint = floci.PrimaryEndpoint;
var host = floci.Host;
var port = floci.Port;
var connectionString = floci.ConnectionStringExpression;
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem id='typescript' label='TypeScript'>
```typescript
const endpoint = await floci.primaryEndpoint();
const host = await floci.host();
const port = await floci.port();
const connectionString = await floci.connectionStringExpression();
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

`connectionStringExpression` resolves to `http://localhost:{port}` for host processes and `http://host.docker.internal:{port}` for container dependents that call `WithReference`/`withReference`.

## Environment variables

> When a service references a Floci resource using `WithReference`/`withReference`, the following environment variables are automatically injected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a service references a Floci resource using `WithReference`/`withReference`, the following environment variables are automatically injected:
```

> **AWS** (`ConnectionStrings__<name>` shown as `ConnectionStrings__floci-aws`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### AWS
```

| Variable | Value |
|----------|-------|

> | `ConnectionStrings__floci-aws` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ConnectionStrings__{name}` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |
```

| `AWS_ENDPOINT_URL` | `http://localhost:{port}` (host processes) / `http://host.docker.internal:{port}` (containers) |
| `AWS_DEFAULT_REGION` | Region passed to `AddFlociAws`/`addFlociAws` (default: `us-east-1`) |
| `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` | `test` |

> | `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` | `test` |

Reviewer: Is "test" really the default value for these env variables? If not use a placeholder or explain what to expect.

Author: Yes, this is the default value floci contributors set. It makes easy to set the local env vars in case someone needs to use the aws cli to interact with the emulator.

> **Azure** (`ConnectionStrings__<name>` shown as `ConnectionStrings__floci-az`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Azure
```

| Variable | Value |
|----------|-------|

> | `ConnectionStrings__floci-az` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ConnectionStrings__{name}` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |
```

| `AZURE_STORAGE_CONNECTION_STRING` | Connection string pointed at the Floci Azure endpoint, using the well-known `devstoreaccount1` dev storage account credentials |

> **GCP** (`ConnectionStrings__<name>` shown as `ConnectionStrings__floci-gcp`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GCP
```

| Variable | Value |
|----------|-------|

> | `ConnectionStrings__floci-gcp` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ConnectionStrings__{name}` | `http://localhost:{port}` (standard Aspire connection string) |
```

You can override any of these settings via standard Aspire environment variable configuration. All Floci-specific settings can also be set via `FLOCI_`-prefixed environment variables.

## Integration testing

Floci is ideal for integration testing cloud-dependent code without requiring real cloud credentials or incurring costs. Since each Floci resource is managed as a standard Aspire resource, you can use it in integration tests the same way you use other Aspire resources.

## Supported services

- **AWS** (`floci/floci`) — 65+ services including S3, DynamoDB, Lambda, EC2, SQS, SNS, Kinesis, RDS, CloudFormation, CloudWatch, IAM, and many more
- **Azure** (`floci/floci-az`) — Blob/Queue/Table Storage, Cosmos DB, Functions, Event Hubs, Service Bus
- **GCP** (`floci/floci-gcp`) — Pub/Sub, Firestore, Datastore, Storage, Secret Manager, Cloud Functions

For a complete list of supported services per cloud, visit the [Floci documentation](https://floci.io).

## Troubleshooting

### Container fails to start

- Ensure Docker is running and has sufficient resources
- Check that the specified port isn't already in use

> - Verify the Floci container image is available locally or can be pulled from Docker Hub

Reviewer: These are imperative complete sentences so periods are better:
```suggestion
- Ensure Docker is running and has sufficient resources.
- Check that the specified port isn't already in use.
- Verify the Floci container image is available locally or can be pulled from Docker Hub.
```

### Connection refused errors

- Verify the Floci container is running: `docker ps | grep floci`
- Check that the endpoint URL matches the configured port

> - Ensure the service has the correct `WithReference`/`withReference` to the Floci resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verify the Floci container is running: `docker ps | grep floci`
- Check that the endpoint URL matches the configured port.
- Ensure the service has the correct `WithReference`/`withReference` to the Floci resource.
```

### Data persistence issues

- Verify the bind mount directory has the correct permissions
- Check that the host path exists before starting the container

> - Use absolute paths for bind mounts to avoid path resolution issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verify the bind mount directory has the correct permissions.
- Check that the host path exists before starting the container.
- Use absolute paths for bind mounts to avoid path resolution issues.
```
